Microscope Lab
● Be able to identify the different parts of the microscope .
○ Base - The bottom portion of the supporting framework and the only part that touches
the desk.
○ Arm - The portion of the supporting framework that sits on the base and supports the
stage and body. The arm of our microscopes has an orange handle built into its back.
○ Body - The body is at the upper end of the arm and contains prisms to direct light from
the objectives up through the oculars. The body can pivot so that you can show your
partner or your instructor what you are looking at.
○ Oculars - The ocular lenses are at the top of the pair of binocular tubes on top of the
body. You will look through the oculars. Sometimes we will refer to the oculars as
eyepieces. These eyepieces magnify images ten times (10X). The right one has a built
in pointer. Rotating the outer ring of the eyepiece moves the pointer, but be careful as
adjusting the interocular distance also moves the pointer. By moving the mechanical
stage and the eyepiece an object can be precisely situated under the pointer tip. This
permits you to indicate to another person some particular small object you have seen.
○ Nosepiece - Below the body is a round nosepiece. Four objective lenses are attached
to the nosepiece. Rotate the nosepiece to swing the desired lens into position. The
objective will "click" into place when it is properly aligned.
○ Scanning Objective - The shortest of the four lenses. It has a red colored band around
it. It is marked with a 4X, indicating its magnification. This lens has the widest field of
view and greatest depth of field of any of the objectives. It should always be used when
first locating an object.
○ Low Power Objective - Marked with a yellow band, this objective magnifies an image
10 times (10X).
○ High Power Objective - A blue band encircles the sides. It magnifies 40 times (40X).
○ Oil Immersion Objective - Marked with a white band. Use of this objective requires a
drop of special oil between the slide and the lens to reduce light scattering. We will
never use this objective in Bio201, but in Bio205 you will use it regularly. It magnifies
100X.
○ Stage - The large square black platform on which slides or other objects are placed to
be studied. The opening near the center allows light to pass from the lamp below
through the object being viewed.
○ Mechanical Stage - A spring loaded clamping device which secures slides. Its two
adjusting knobs below the stage allow the clamped slide to be precisely moved right
and left, and forward and back, so that the slide can be positioned correctly on the
stage.
○ Iris Diaphragm - This device is attached to the underside of the stage and can be
adjusted to control the amount of light passing upward from the lamp. On our Leica
microscopes, the iris diaphragm ring is marked with the magnification of the objectives.
Rotate the ring of the iris diaphragm so that the magnification of the objective in use
faces frontward. If the correct iris diaphragm setting is not in use, there may not be
enough light to see details in the specimen or you may see a shadow on the edge of the
specimen.
○ Condenser - A simple lens above the diaphragm and below the stage which focuses
light from the lamp onto the slide.
○ Lamp - The light source for the microscope. These microscopes are equipped with LED
lamps. The switch on the right side of the base will turn the lamp on and off. You can
adjust the intensity of the light with the light adjustment knob located on the left side of
the base. Turn toward you to brighten and away to dim.
○ Coarse Focusing Knob - These large knobs on either side of the arm near the base
are used when focusing. They control the distance between the stage and the bottom of
the objectives. A small rotation of this knob produces a noticeable movement of the
stage. Use it when focusing the scanning objective.
○ Fine Focusing Knob - The smaller knobs located lateral to and inside of the coarse
adjustment knobs. These are used for precise focusing as is required with the low
power, high power and oil immersion objectives. Rotation of this knob produces very
slight changes in the height of the stage.




● Know the four different objective lenses and their power of magnification (see list below for
details)
○ Scanning objective lens
○ Low power objective lens
○ High power objective lens
○ Oil immersion lens


● Know how to determine the total magnification of any objective lens
  ○ Total magnification calculation
    ○ Magnification of the ocular multiplied by the magnification of the objective lens = total
    magnification
    ○ For example: 10x magnification (ocular) x 4x magnification of the scanning objective
    lens = 40x total magnification
    ○ For example: 10x magnification (ocular) x 10x magnification of the low power objective
    lens = 100x total magnification
    ○ For example: 10x magnification (ocular) x 40x magnification of the high power objective
    lens = 400x total magnification


Mitosis Lab
● You will need to identify:
  ○ Prophase
  ○ Metaphase
  ○ Anaphase
  ○ Telophase
  ○ Cleavage furrow
  ○ Spindle fibers


Histology Lab
1. What is the general tissue type?
2. What is the specific tissue type?
3. Give an example of a location in the body where you would find this tissue type? Learn 1
or 2 and be able to give them as an example.
4. What cellular characteristic is this pointing to (ie- apical surface, basement membrane…)?


Epithelial Tissue
Specific Epithelial Tissues
1. Simple Squamous Epithelium
  a. Location - alveoli of lungs; outside lining of GI tract
  b. Cellular characteristics - nucleus
2. Simple Cuboidal Epithelium
  a. Location - kidney tubules; inside lining of ducts
  b. Cellular characteristics - lumen, apical surface, nucleus, basement membrane
3. Simple Columnar Epithelium
  a. Location - inside lining of intestine; inside lining of stomach
  b. Cellular characteristics - lumen, apical surface, nucleus, basement membrane
  c. Goblet cells - produce mucus
4. Nonkeratinized Stratified Squamous Epithelium
  a. Location - inside lining of esophagus; inside lining of mouth; inside lining of vagina
  b. Cellular characteristics - lumen, basement membrane, apical surface, germinal layer
5. Keratinized Stratified Squamous Epithelium (we will go into MUCH more detail in the skin
section)
  a. Location - epidermis
  b. Cellular characteristics - keratinized layer, germinal layer, apical surface
6. Transitional Epithelium
  a. Location - inside lining of ureters; inside lining of bladder
  b. Cellular characteristics - lumen, apical surface, basement membrane
7. Ciliated Pseudostratified columnar Epithelium
  a. Location - inside lining of trachea; male urethra; epididymis
  b. Cellular characteristics - lumen, cilia, basement membrane


Connective Tissue
Specific Connective Tissue to know:
1. Areolar connective tissue
  a. Location - subcutaneous layer
  b. Cellular characteristics - fibroblast, collagen fiber, elastic fiber
2. Adipose tissue
  a. Location - subcutaneous layer; surrounding organs; behind eyes
  b. Cellular characteristics - oil droplet, nucleus, cytoplasm
3. Dense regular connective tissue
  a. Location - tendons; ligaments
  b. Cellular characteristics - collagen fibers, fibroblast nuclei
4. Dense irregular connective tissue
  a. Location - dermis; white of the eye (sclera)
  b. Cellular characteristics - collagen fibers, fibroblast nuclei
5. Hyaline cartilage
  a. Location - epiphyseal plate; tracheal rings; articular cartilage; nose
  b. Cellular characteristics - perichondrium, chondroblast, chondrocyte, lacunae; matrix (predominantly collagen fibers)
6. Elastic cartilage
  a. Location - ear; epiglottis; eustachian tube
  b. Cellular characteristics - perichondrium, chondroblast, chondrocyte, lacunae; matrix (predominantly elastic fibers)
7. Bone
  a. Location - bone
  b. Cellular characteristics - osteon; central canal; concentric lamella; interstitial lamella;
  osteocyte; osteoblast; lacuna; canaliculi; perforating canal; periosteum; spongy bone
  (model only); endosteum (model only)
NOTE: Matrix is made up of ground substance and fibers. There are three fiber types: collagen fibers, elastic
fibers, reticular fibers

Muscle
Be able to list the major characteristics of the 3 different types of muscle tissue.
1. Skeletal muscle
  a. Shape - rod shaped
  b. Number of nuclei - multiple
  c. Striated
  d. Voluntary
2. Smooth muscle
  a. Shape - spindle shaped
  b. Number of nuclei - one
  c. Non-striated
  d. Involuntary
3. Cardiac muscle
  a. Shape - branched
  b. Number of nuclei - one
  c. Striated
  d. Involuntary



Specific Tissue Type
1. Skeletal Muscle
  a. Location - muscles of the body
  b. Cellular characteristics - nuclei, striations, sarcolemma, endomysium, perimysium, fascicles,
epimysium
2. Smooth Muscle
  a. Location - Walls of the GI tract, walls of blood vessels, uterus
  b. Cellular characteristics - nuclei, endomysium
3. Cardiac Muscle
  a. Location - heart
  b. Cellular characteristics - nuclei, striations, intercalated disc (desmosomes and gap junctions)



Nervous Tissue
Be able to list the two types of cells that make up nervous tissue


Skin Lab
1. Be able to list the 2 major layers and the primary tissue that composes each.
    a. Epidermis - keratinized stratified squamous epithelium
    b. Dermis - 20% areolar connective tissue and 80% dense irregular connective tissue

2. Be able to identify the different layers of the epidermis in both thick and thin skin.
    a. Stratum basale
    b. Stratum spinosum
    c. Stratum granulosum
    d. Stratum lucidum (only in thick skin)
    e. Stratum corneum
3. Be able to identify the different layers of the dermis.
    a. Papillary region
    b. Reticular region
4. Be able to locate and identify the following on models and slide:
    ● dermal papillae
    ● sebaceous glands
    ● Hair shaft
    ● hair follicle
    ● Hair root
    ● Papillae of hair
    ● sweat glands
    ● Sweat gland duct
    ● arrector pili muscles
    ● pacinian corpuscles
    ● meissner's corpuscles
